Madrid, is home to some of the most fascinating
buildings and public spaces in Europe.
Yet despite its monumental
appearance and cultural richness,
Madrid is actually a surprisingly young
city compared to Rome, Paris or London.
Unlike many European capitals,
Madrid doesn’t have a Roman past.
There are no great Roman ruins, no monumental
cathedral inherited from the Middle Ages.
In fact, the rise of Madrid began
relatively late, during the Renaissance.
In the 16th century, when Spain was
flourishing as a prosperous empire,
expanding its civilization in the New World,
Madrid—its present-day capital—was nothing but
a small fortified town with little importance.
During the Middle Ages, the king and the
court did not rule from a single city,
but frequently moved from one city to
another according to political needs and war.
Powerful historic cities like Toledo,
Burgos, and León competed for prominence.
In 1561, King Philip II decreed that Madrid
was to be given the status of única corte,
with the royal chancellery
transferred from Toledo.
This insignificant town was chosen as the royal
seat for two main reasons: its location near
the geometric center of the Peninsula, and the
political need to consolidate the unification
of Spain by removing the seat of government from
otherwise jealously competing historic cities.
Within a few decades, the city’s
urban area grew significantly,
developing an organic pattern in which
streets radiated from medieval nuclei.
The clearest example of this, is Puerta del
Sol—the Gate of the Sun—which used to be a
gate to the old fortified town, and as the city
grew, it became a central space for commerce.
Although it looks very different today, with the
monumental Post Office dominating the square,
it still preserves its medieval layout of streets
radiating outward from the center of the city.
Calle Mayor was a street
that crossed the entire city,
stretching from the Alcázar—the king’s
residence—to Puerta del Sol, and beyond.
Along this street, were situated noble
palaces, taverns, and important medieval
squares, including Plaza de la
Villa—home to the old City Hall.
There were other important
squares in the city such as
Plaza de las Descalzas and Plaza de la Paja.
However, Plaza de la Villa is the only one that
still has its medieval form with
most of its original buildings.
For Madrid, the transitional
element between the Middle Ages
and the Renaissance in terms of urbanism,
is the Plaza Mayor—the main central square.
Plaza Mayor was originally a confluence
of roads outside the medieval city walls,
known as Plaza del Arrabal, the town’s market
where commercial activities took place.
Plaza del Arrabal had an open, irregular
form, but with the rapid growth of the city’s
population that followed the establishment
of the court in Madrid, it was considered
necessary to enlarge the plaza into a new
square worthy of the seat of the royal court.
The construction of Plaza Mayor was commenced in
1617 following the design of
architect Juan Gómez de Mora.
A perfect confinement is achieved in
the new heart of the city by carving
a perfect rectangular space out
of the medieval urban fabric.
At the time, an extensive Baroque system
of streets connecting public spaces was
being developed in many European cities, but
in Spain this concept was rarely adopted.
Instead, major planned public spaces such as
Plaza Mayor remained completely isolated from
the city’s main streets, so that nothing would
disturb their sense of enclosed space intended
for public gathering—possibly a feature inherited
from the courtyards of medieval mosques in Spain.
Plaza Mayor became the principal stage
for public spectacles, being able to
accommodate more than 50,000 people, some
4,000 of them in the enclosing buildings.
Uniquely Spanish urban activities that
developed in the Plaza Mayor included
bullfighting on horseback—a tradition
that had already consolidated in Spain
in the previous century, and from which
later evolved the special-purpose plaza
de toros—and autos de fe—solemn
events by the Inquisition where
heretics were judged and executed—as well
as religious celebrations such as Easter.
Serving as the backdrop for public ceremonies,
Casa de la Panadería was the chief building of the
square, recognizable by its steepled clock towers,
its arcade on the base, and by
the later frescoes on its facade.
The building functioned as
a bread shop on the ground
floor and housed the royal box on the first floor.
Something I like about Plaza mayor is
the perspectives created within the main
entrances to the precinct— Because the square
is embedded within an organic medieval fabric,
its access points are not coming in
orthogonally, but approach at oblique angles.
Yet all of them converge visually toward the
center—so you can be standing all the way across
the street over there, and you’ll always
see the central statue framed by the arch.
Plazas Mayores—main central squares—were the
outstanding contribution of Spain to European
urbanism, and Madrid’s Plaza Mayor,
became the model of plazas mayores
that would be exported into all the Spanish
cities including those in the New World.
After Madrid became the permanent seat of the
court, Philip II heavily modified the Moorish
citadel that had stood on the site since the 9th
century, converting it into the Real Alcázar de
Madrid, which in its final phase—after successive
additions made by later monarchs—resulted in a
hybrid of medieval and Renaissance architecture: a
great mass dominating the western edge of Madrid.
Its plan preserved the footprint
of the Moorish citadel, adapted
to the border of the cliff on which
it stood, above the river Manzanares.
The building was organized
around two central courtyards,
separated by the royal chapel in the middle.
The main facade faced a large forecourt,
also inherited from the old citadel.
This elevation displayed a
clear Renaissance character,
with a symmetrical composition of lateral towers
and a central body framing the main entrance.
Columns articulating the two upper levels framed
each window, and paired columns were featured
in the central body with a protruding
gable bearing the royal coat of arms.
Those steepled towers that defined its silhouette,
are very characteristic of
Madrid’s 17th century architecture,
and you can still see them in many buildings
and churches that survive from that time.
On Christmas Eve 1734, a
fire destroyed the Alcázar,
and four years later construction began on the
Palacio Real, the Royal Palace that we see today.
For this new residence, King Philip V, who
had been born and raised at Versailles,
wanted a more modern and monumental palace, so
he commissioned the Italian Baroque architect
Filippo Juvarra to design the building in the
style of the great European palaces of the time.
Juvarra planned a huge three-court complex,
but after his death, his successor,
Giovanni Battista Sacchetti, changed the
plans and constructed a single-court block.
The facade features columns of giant
order over a rusticated ground floor
with protruding sections at the corners and
center, and the courtyard is composed of an
arcade of two tiers with a recessed third
level to reduce the impact of the scale,
thus achieving a well-lit
space of excellent proportions.
Sacchetti’s design is heavily influenced
by Bernini’s unrealized design for
the Louvre in Paris, which features
the exact same layout and elements.
On the opposite side of the Palacio
Real you can see the Almudena Cathedral,
but don’t be fooled by the Neoclassical appearance
of its exterior, this is a 20th century building.
For most of its history,
Madrid didn’t have a Cathedral,
as the diocese of the region was
located in the city of Toledo,
so really the closest thing to a cathedral that
Madrid ever had was the Colegiata de San Isidro,
a beautiful baroque church located
just a few blocks from here.
This church, though beautiful, is just an eclectic
result of much later architectural ambitions.
In the second half of the 18th century, as the
spirit of the Enlightenment spread across Europe,
there was a growing ambition to put Spain at
the level of other European powers in terms of
scientific advancement, so, on the outskirts
of the city was planned the Salón del Prado,
a great tree-lined avenue designed to
integrate art, science, and nature,
through three major architectural projects: an
astronomical observatory, a botanical garden,
and a royal museum—today
the famous Museo del Prado.
These three projects were commissioned to one of
the most illustrious architects of the time, Juan
de Villanueva, who refined and consolidated in
Spain the Neoclassical language of architecture.
For the Museo del Prado, Villanueva envisioned a
building that combined the functions of a Natural
History Museum and a Temple of Science
intended to house learned societies.
A central block and two vast pavilions
are attached by extended wings.
The building is characterized by
screens of columns and arches,
and a restrained use of ornament.
Under Ferdinand VII the Prado was transformed
into a picture gallery—a use it continues to
serve today—housing one of the finest
collections of paintings in the world.
Within the urban project of the Salón del Prado,
numerous landscape elements would be placed,
among them the fountains of
Neptune, Apollo, and Cybele.
These helped to articulate the axis of the avenue.
At the western edge of the city, Philip IV
had built the Palacio del Buen Retiro in 1630.
As its name suggests, it was
conceived as a palace of retreat,
used as a secondary royal residence,
surrounded by extensive gardens.
Palacio del Buen Retiro was seriously
damaged during the Napoleonic Wars,
and gradually fell into decline
over the course of the 19th century,
until most of the complex
was eventually demolished.
Only two elements survived: the
Casón—the ballroom—and the Salón
de Reinos—a room used for diplomatic receptions.
You can still see these two buildings today,
now absorbed into the urban fabric of Madrid.
The former palace gardens, however, endured
and were transformed in the 19th century into
a picturesque, Romantic landscape, enriched
with architectural and sculptural elements,
before being opened to the public as a city
park—today known as Parque del Buen Retiro.
Enclosing the entire city, was the
Customs wall of Philip IV, built in 1625.
This wall was never a truly defensive
structure, but instead served for centuries
as the administrative boundary of the city,
regulating goods and controlling access to Madrid.
The wall was demolished in the 1860s.
However, two of its royal gates still survive.
One is the famous Puerta de Alcalá—a Neoclassical
gate that stood on the main road leading to
the neighboring city of Alcalá de Henares.
The other is Puerta de Toledo, designed
in the form of a triumphal arch, and
erected to commemorate the restoration of
the monarchy after the Napoleonic occupation.
By the late 19th century, Madrid’s
uncontrolled population growth as
a result of industrialization, lead to
overcrowding and poor sanitary conditions.
So it became necessary to expand the
city outward in a controlled way,
with the aim of creating a modern capital city,
comparable to other European capitals like
Paris under the reforms of Napoleon III.
So a grid expansion of the city known as
“ensanche” or “enlargement” was proposed
in 1860 with straight, wide streets,
reinforcing the idea of light and air,
seeking a healthy city, very different to
the medieval, organic fabric of the old city.
The plan also designated spaces for housing
as well as spaces for parish churches,
hospitals, and other public buildings.
The north would comprise the high society, with
elegant neighborhoods like Salamanca and Chamberí.
The east would comprise the middle classes and
the south the working classes and industry.
This segregation was not entirely intentional,
but it reflects the social
structure of the 19th century.
The ensanche of Madrid was carried out over
several decades, and solved many of
the issues that the city presented.
However, by the early 20th century, the
historic center remained dense and overcrowded,
so in order to modernize the old city and
improve its circulation, over 300 buildings
were demolished to make way for Gran Vía, a great
avenue that cuts through the medieval fabric,
planned to accommodate great hotels,
theaters, and commercial buildings.
Something I think is interesting about Gran Vía,
is that you can see how architectural styles
evolved as Gran Vía was being developed—in the
first section, Beaux Arts buildings predominate,
and as you keep walking along the avenue,
these gradually give way to Art Deco buildings,
which had become popular by the late
1920s when Gran Vía was finished.
You can distinguish three separate
periods of urban unity in Madrid.
When the city was established as the capital
in 1561, Spain was ruled by the house of the
Austrias—the Habsburg dynasty—and you clearly
see a characteristic Madrid style in the
architecture—sober Renaissance forms in austere
brick buildings with details in stone, towers
with steeples, a Plaza Mayor, and a layout of the
city that organically develops as the city grows.
In 1700 the last king of the
Austrias died without an heir,
and the French Bourbon dynasty
ascended to the Spanish throne.
The Bourbons shifted towards a very
French-style centralist and absolute
monarchy and you can see this clearly reflected in
the architecture—more monumental and symmetrical
forms made entirely in stone, like the new
Royal Palace with an Italian Baroque style,
other buildings featuring Italian and
French influences, and a more axial
urban planning like Salón del Prado, which follows
the new trends of European monumental urbanism.
The third period, defined by
the Ensanche and the opening
of Gran Vía, marks the emergence
of the modern capital of Spain.
These three layers form the
complex urban identity of Madrid:
a city where organic medieval growth,
Baroque order, and modern planning coexist,
each one still legible in its streets,
shaping the way you experience the city today.
Remember that if you join as a channel member,
you can watch extended versions of my videos with
much more detailed explanations and live videos.
Thank you so much for watching.
I hope you enjoyed and learned.
Please like this video, subscribe to my channel,
and I'll see you very soon in another episode.
Goodbye!